# Endometrial-DNA-Methylation-Endometriosis-Study

Endometriosis is a common gynecological disorder affecting 11% of reproductive aged women and is a leading cause of pain and infertility. This study aimed to investigate global DNAm profiles in endometrium associated with endometriosis, menstrual cycle and genetic variation.  Endometrial samples were collected from 984 patients with confirmed endometriosis (n=637) and women without endometriosis (n=347). Patients were recruited through the University of California San Francisco, USA, University of Melbourne, Australia, Endometriosis CaRe Centre in Oxford, UK, and EXPPECT Centre, The University of Edinburgh, UK, using the World Endometriosis Research Foundation Endometriosis Phenome and Biobanking Harmonization Project (WERF EPHect) standardized protocols for tissue collection and processing, and participant characteristics and clinical annotation. DNA was extracted from samples and was use to generate DNA methylation (DNAm) data using the Illumina Infinium MethylationEPIC Beadchip and genotype data using the Axiom Precision Medicine Research array. Estimates from this study suggest that 15.4% of the variation in endometriosis is captured by DNAm. DNAm analysis identified significant differences in DNAm profiles and DNAm networks, associated with endometriosis, endometriosis sub-phenotypes and menstrual cycle phase. Integration of DNAm and genetic data in an DNAm quantitative trait locus (mQTL) analysis identified 118,185 independent cis-mQTLs including 51 associated with risk of endometriosis highlighting target genes contributing to disease risk. This study identified novel factors affecting epigenetic regulation in endometrium associated with endometriosis risk and disease heterogeneity and provides an important data resource for reproductive medicine.

Files contain R code used to perform differential methylation analyses, network analyses, mQTL analyses and context speciifc analyses as described in the manuscript.

Genotype data generated as part of this study is available on dbGaP and methylation data is available on GEO.
